hi everyone my name is Dr Mark eonon
welcome to heal NPD despite being one of
the more popular mental health topics
online pathological narcissism and NPD
are very misunderstood misinformation
confusion and stigmatizing
representations whip people into a
frenzied state of fear and loathing of
this disorder while leading them down
unhelpful paths so in this episode I'll
address some of the more common mistakes
about
narcissism
[Music]
misconception number one NPD is not a
mental illness the American Psychiatric
association is the largest Professional
Organization of psychiatrists in the
world they also published the DSM which
is the standard diagnostic system for
mental disorders used in the United
States the APA basically defines mental
illness
categorizing it into a system of
disorders that clinicians use to
diagnose their patients now according to
the APA all diagnosable mental disorders
are forms of mental illness and that
includes personality disorders like
NPD they go on to say that mental
illness consists of two main features
changes in thoughts feelings or
behaviors and problems and or distress
in work family or social settings the
APA also publishes peer reviewed
journals one of them featured this
article titled narcissistic personality
disorder progress in recognition and
treatment here's a quote major
depressive disorder is the most common
comorbid disorder in patients with
pathological narcissism or NPD the need
for self-enhancement and chronic
disillusionment with self make these
individuals particularly susceptible to
substance use suicidal preoccupation in
these patients is character
characterized by self-esteem
disregulation and life events that
decrease
self-esteem the diagnostic focus on
patients external characteristics and
interpersonal Behavior tends to dismiss
the importance of their internal
distress and painful experiences of
self-esteem fluctuations self-criticism
and emotional disregulation end quote
now this is a clear description of
mental illness involving changes in
thinking feeling and behavior and
involving clear problems in distress
that include risk of suicide and
comorbid disorders like major depressive
disorder whatever else you've heard
personality disorders like NPD and less
severe forms of narcissistic pathology
like pathological narcissism are
absolutely 100% mental illnesses
misconception number two NPD is
untreatable this is an old misconception
that simply won't die in part it's a
holdover from the early early mid 20th
century when the field of psychology had
not Advanced enough to treat many forms
of Psychopathology including
pathological narcissism however the
field has advanced considerably since
the 1930s 40s and 50s we have a much
better understanding of narcissistic
pathology and of the unique forms of
transference that occur with
narcissistic patients in therapy there's
been a revolution in the understanding
of pathologies like BPD and NPD several
therapy approaches have been developed
specifically to treat these issues
here's another quote from the article I
referenced earlier expected outcome in
treatment of NPD is dependent on a
number of factors including treatment
modality and focus the patient's
motivation and ability to establish and
sustain an alliance with the treatment
provider types of identified and
processed problems and external life
circumstances that either support or
intervene with treatment basically the
authors are saying that treatment
Effectiveness depends on the individual
and the same could be said for literally
any other mental disorder the article
goes on to list the following treatment
approaches for NPD psychoanalysis and
psychoanalytic Psychotherapy
psychodynamic Psychotherapy transference
Focus Psychotherapy schema Focus
Psychotherapy metacognitive
interpersonal Psychotherapy group
therapy dialectical behavioral therapy
and mentalization based therapy they
further list the following five areas of
change that are Central to treatment of
NPD interpersonal and Vocational
functioning sense of agency emotional
regulation reflective ability and the
ability to mourn in a future video I'll
go through each of these treatment
targets and why they're important but
for now just know that there are
numerous treatment approaches with
demonstrated Effectiveness in treating
NPD are any of them guaranteed to work
no there's no such thing as a treatment
in mental health that is 100% effective
treatment depends depends on the
individual and also on the goodness of
fit between the clinician the approach
and the patient whatever you've heard
about NPD not being treatable it's not
correct NPD is treatable there is hope
for Meaningful change if the person is
motivated and willing to do the work
misconception number three even if NPD
is treatable the gains are superficial
healing from this disorder is not
possible this one reflects the wi spread
misconception that people with NPD are
somehow fundamentally broken I hear
about it all the time in my practice and
I read about it in emails from people
around the world many of them are
terrified some to the point where
they're contemplating suicide they feel
like a lost cause and everywhere they
turn for information about this disorder
all they see are unsympathetic
stigmatizing
representations not a good combination
for a disorder that centers on unstable
self-esteem
unlike the previous point about
treatment options for NPD this one's a
little bit more subjective the question
of whether or not someone can quote heal
from the disorder is largely a matter of
perspective and the theoretical model
through which we're conceptualizing
pathological narcissism from the name of
this channel it should be clear that I
believe it's possible to heal I use
psychoanalytic Psychotherapy to treat
issues like pathological narcissism and
NPD remember that was one of the
treatments listed in the article I cited
earlier my Approach is heavily informed
by three schools of thought object
relations self psychology and the
Contemporary relational model through
this treatment lens disorders like BPD
and NPD are seen as developmental
arrests that result from early and
chronic relational trauma the person
becomes stuck in an archaic mode of
relating they become reliant on
developmentally immature coping
mechanisms that tend to distort re
reality disrupt the continuity of
internal experience and blur the
boundaries between the self and other
people over time these issues create
issues of their own keeping new injuries
on old ones and sending the person down
ever more unhelpful paths leaving them
vulnerable to additional traumas that in
turn perpetuate the cycle treatment is a
matter of helping the person to grow and
develop the capacities to negotiate life
without heavy Reliance on archaic coping
mechanisms like projection projective
identification denial and splitting it's
about encouraging the development of
important capacities like those listed
earlier agency emotional regulation
reflective ability and the ability to
mourn these changes are accomplished by
providing the conditions in therapy that
weren't necessarily present in the
person's early care environment things
like emotional validation the experience
of being seen for who they are on the
inside a space where it's possible to
explore feelings of Shame a space where
there's care consistency accountability
honesty warmth and most importantly a
space where there's empathy it consists
in walking a delicate line between
validating feelings without gratifying
pathological perspectives and behaviors
and this by the way is in direct
agreement with the current peer-reviewed
literature on the treatment of
pathological narcissism and NPD it's a
model that's based on implicit Trust of
the patients intrinsic capacity for
growth when presented with the right
conditions this approach is based on an
inside out understanding of the central
issues involved in pathological
narcissism rather than the common error
of focusing on external Behavior more
importantly it holds the patient's
Humanity at the very center of the
treatment and it makes space for the
pain and anguish that live at the heart
of the
disorder okay so let's say it's possible
through hard work work and dedication to
push through the developmental stuckness
to heal the wounded self and develop
more adaptive ways of coping and
communicating does that constitute a
cure well yes and no we don't really
talk about cures in mental health mental
disorders are not like medical disorders
we may someday develop a coherent
neurological model of Mental Illness but
for now we can seldom locate the broken
brain circuitry that we presume causes
the problem we therefore don't really
cure mental disorders we treat them
people get better over time they feel
less distressed they function more
effectively they're better able to
devote the time and mental energy to
things that matter in their lives they
become better at coping they become
better at being able to see themselves
realistically and to treat themselves
and other people with kindness and
respect now for some people we might as
well call this a cure but since we
didn't really understand on a biological
level what was causing the problem in
the first place we can't really say that
the problem has gone for good in the
case of personality disorders it's
absolutely possible to help someone grow
and develop the necessary capacities
such that they would no longer qualify
for a diagnosis of Personality Disorder
however they'll likely always retain the
personality style that corresponded to
the personality disorder and that's okay
we all have one or more dominant
personality Styles a narcissistic
personality style is one in which the
central concerns are about self-worth
and the primary defensive adaptations
are about maintaining self-esteem the
quote disorder part comes into play when
the person is unable to adequately cope
with those Central concerns and their
life begins to fall apart having a
narcissistic personality style doesn't
make someone a narcissist or mean that
they have NPD when I work with someone
who has NPD I tell them that they'll
probably always have narcissistic
concerns about self-worth but that the
level of distress that they feel about
those concerns and the amount that those
concerns dominate their life and
relationships will likely improve and
that's about as close to a cure as we
can get misconception number four all
narcissists are
abusers this is an especially difficult
one because it seems to be about
advocating for victims people
understandably want to place a spot
light on the harm that people with NPD
can cause to those around them in my
very first video I outlined the ways
that the current diagnostic criteria for
NPD are partly responsible for this
because they focus exclusively on
grandiose traits of the disorder and
that was a reaction by the American
Psychiatric association in the mid1
1980s to the perception that their
diagnostic system was too heavily
steeped in psychoanalytic models of
Psychopathology narcissism is after all
originally a psycho analytic concept the
term was popularized by Freud himself in
1914 so to create a theoretically
neutral diagnostic system the APA
revised the definition of NPD so that it
focused only on observable traits
unfortunately this removed the heart of
the disorder and made NPD into sort of a
hollow caricature with traits that seem
to come and go depending on the
situation recall the article cited
earlier the one that warned against the
mistake of focusing only on external
attributes of NPD to really understand
the disorder we need to look Beyond
grandiosity people have been writing
about this ever since the APA changed
the diagnostic criteria for NPD in the
1980s here's a quote from an article
that appeared around that time the
desire to exclude reference to
dynamically unconscious mental activity
continues to hamper some categories for
example narcissistic personality
disorder easily describes the overtly
aggressive expression of narcissistic
conflict but deals poorly with the
equally Disturbed quiet passive
narcissistic patients whose grandiosity
is concealed behind a facade of
compliance or shyness end quote the
current DSM description of NPD provides
a clinical picture of an entitled
arrogant unsympathetic individual who
demands constant praise and admiration
and while this certainly describes one
possible narcissistic presentation
it by no means represents all possible
presentations by removing mention of the
more vulnerable features including
fragility of self introjective
preoccupations feelings of worthlessness
Shame and humiliation difficulties in
close relationships depression illness
anxiety social anxiety social isolation
and
suicidality the APA has elevated one
pole of narcissistic disturbance at the
expense of the other
the last 20 years of research have been
slowly rediscovering those discarded
facets of NPD a growing number of
peer-reviewed Articles have been calling
for a new revision of the diagnostic
criteria for this disorder one that
grounds it in deficits and disabilities
rather than the current picture of
vanity egotism and arrogance in 2013 the
DSM 5 took an important step in this
Direction with the inclusion of an
alternative diagnostic criteria for NPD
that emphasizes impairment in at least
two of the following four areas of life
identity self-direction empathy and
intimacy similarly the dsm5 text
revision released in 2022 contains
important additions to the diagnostic
description of NPD that includes fragile
self-esteem perfectionism vulnerability
to emotional overwhelm and suicidality
but unfortunately these additions have
yet to appear in in the actual
diagnostic checklist that everyone
references when they make videos or
write articles describing narcissism
however slowly we are restoring a more
comprehensive picture of this form of
mental illness one that's grounded in
psychological distress and dysfunction
and one that views arrogance and
grandiosity as symptoms of a disorder
that's really about self-image that's
really about identity and that's really
about deficits in the ability to relate
authentically
in relationships and this is why I'm
always emphasizing that NPD and
pathological narcissism are forms of
mental illness I don't say that to
undermine a person's responsibility for
their actions I say it because we need
to think about pathological narcissism
as a comprehensible condition one that's
based on a disordered system of thoughts
feelings and behaviors this system has a
kind of internal logic it makes sense
when you think about it as a mental
illness instead of quote the
disorder simply labeling people with NPD
as abusers Predators or evil tells us
nothing about what's actually happening
on the inside and that disempowers
everyone people who are hurt or abused
can't make sense of what happened
because there's no sense to be made
Beyond these people are abusers people
with NPD can't heal if the only
information available is people with NPD
are abusers and Society can't make sense
of the Dynamics that lead to and result
from NPD amidst a never-ending chorus of
they're all abusers Full Stop
pathological narcissism is not a fancy
term for abuser mental illness does not
cause abusive Behavior please don't take
my word for it here's what the National
Domestic Violence Hotline has to say
about this a common assumption we hear
at the hotline is that abuse is caused
by a person's mental health condition
for for example bipolar disorder
depression anxiety post-traumatic stress
disorder narcissistic personality
borderline personality or antisocial
personality while these are serious
mental health conditions they do not
cause abuse nothing in the diagnostic
and statistical Manual of mental
disorders fifth edition states that a
mental illness solely causes a partner
to be abusive in a relationship however
there are a select few diagnoses that
can increase the risk R of abusive
patterns to show up in a relationship
and in other areas of life mental
illness tends to impact all areas of a
person's life such as work interactions
with friends family engagement and
personal relationships in contrast abuse
primarily impacts personal relationships
and typically not the other areas of
life end quote sometimes the internal
conflicts that cause pathological
narcissism are expressed in the form of
inter personal antagonism and that can
lead to abusive behaviors as stated in
the quote I just read some diagnoses can
increase the risk of abusive behaviors
but the behaviors themselves are not
caused by NPD there are in fact many
forms of mental illness that can
increase the likelihood of abusive
patterns of behavior mental disorders
change the way a person thinks feels or
behaves causing problems or distress in
work family or social settings
while it's generally true that people
with mental illnesses are more likely to
be the victims of abuse it's also true
that people with mental illness
experience changes in perception
judgment impulse control and behavior
these changes sometimes lead to
mistreatment or abuse of other people
NPD is by no means alone in this regard
we need to be able to say things about
NPD and pathological narcissism Beyond
those people are abusers we we need to
be able to actually treat this disorder
and people who suffer from it need
access to information that consists of
more than pictures of devils or evili
eyed people surrounded by mist and smoke
so if you're trying to shut down
discourse about the actual mental
illness behind NPD you aren't doing
anyone any favors you're actually
perpetuating mental health stigma you're
making it harder for people to get
treatment and you're most likely making
it harder for everyone to heal
perhaps yourself included misconception
number five NPD can't be a mental
illness because narcissists change their
behavior depending on the situation okay
this is a big one it rests on a
fundamental misunderstanding of one of
the main issues in personality disorders
like BPD and NPD which is something
called splitting when someone with NPD
quote love bombs what they're really
doing is idealizing and idealizing new
romantic Partners is part of the
diagnostic criteria for NPD the second
diagnostic Criterion listed in the DSM
is preoccupation with fantasies of
unlimited power success Brilliance
beauty or ideal love idealization is one
side of a psychological split that
occurs in pathological narcissism and
NPD the other side is devaluation
idealizing inevitably turns into
devaluing as a clinician when I
experience a patient idealizing me I
know that I need to buckle up because
eventually it will turn to
devaluation and this is not some
voluntary or intentional process on the
part of the patient it's based on
unconscious personality dynamics that
rewrite both the present moment and all
of history when a person with NPD or BPD
idealizes you they literally can't see
any of your flaws furthermore they have
no recollection in that state of mind of
you ever having had any flaws and this
is a prime example of the sort of
distorted perception that's inherent in
personality disorders like NPD when the
equation flips and they begin to devalue
you they literally can't see anything
good about you furthermore history is
Rewritten in that state of mind so that
they can't remember ever having seen
anything good about you and this is a
well documented phenomenon according to
the American Psychological association's
dictionary of psychology splitting is
quote a defense mechanism used to
protect someone from conflict in which
objects provoking anxiety and
ambivalence are dichotomized into
extreme representations with either
positive or negative qualities resulting
in polarized viewpoints that fluctuate
in extremes of seeing the self and
others as either all good or all bad end
quote people who don't understand
splitting will mistake the sudden and
extreme reversal from idealization to
devaluing as a form of deception they
will think that the person was just
buttering them up in order to use them
after they got what they wanted they
dropped or discarded them but that's not
what's actually happening when we talk
about splitting the narcissist is
genuinely swept up in their
idealizations they truly believe that
they finally found the perfect love
object the perfect job or the perfect
friend but the coin eventually flipped
eventually the idealizations turn to
devaluations and the narcissist begins
to see only disappointment only
inadequacy only contempt this love bomb
SL discard cycle is caused by splitting
not some nefarious plan to use and throw
people away the narcissist is also
victimized by this cycle by the way they
continually think they finally found the
one only to have everything turned to
guard garbage because of their own
psychological Dynamics all of us you me
people with NPD were all more likely to
blur the boundaries between ourselves
and the people with whom we're close
including family members romantic
partners and our children that's just a
fact of Human Relationships but when a
person has a personality disorder those
blurred boundaries become more extreme
there's a higher likelihood that the
narcissistic individual will project
idealized or devalued parts of their own
self onto those people with whom they
live because those relationships tend to
be more emotionally charged and also
more familiar they're therefore more
likely to treat family members or
romantic partners with contempt to
devalue or criticize them or to express
their emotional disconstraint at them in
the form of emotional or even physical
abuse but what about when they suddenly
switch from angry and derisive Behavior
behind closed doors to smiling and
friendly Behavior at the neighborhood
barbecue how are they able to switch so
suddenly so seemingly completely doesn't
that mean that their behavior is a
choice doesn't that mean that they're
evil no NPD is not a highly visible
disorder the dysfunctions tend to be
somewhat concealed behind a facade of
high- Performing charm and affability
and this is a consequence of the
disorder itself narcissism involves the
creation of a false self that hides
internal distress and conflict again
this is why the authors of the article
cited earlier warn that we can't simply
focus on external appearances in NPD
it's not the whole story the external
appearance conceals the actual
disordered parts of the personality
chances are you can sit nicely at a
fancy restaurant even if you aren't
feeling particularly calm I'm sure you
can code switch when talking to a
uniform police Poli officer even if
you've done nothing wrong you're
probably more respectful more
deferential even if you were screaming
at your kids in the back seat 2 minutes
before pulling over you probably do your
best to appear calm and in control when
the police officer walks up to your
window these are basic social
adaptations that we all use to function
in society we speak respectfully at job
interviews we dress up to go to church
we smile and say I'm fine how are you to
acquaintances at work the ability to
superficially change our Behavior does
not mean that we don't have a mental
illness it just means that we can
function well enough to hold a job and
not get carded off to jail these social
cues are strong and we learn them when
we're very young just because a person
with NPD sits nicely at church or smiles
and tells a joke to a stranger at the
store doesn't mean they aren't mentally
ill there are many forms of mental
illness that don't necessarily involve
involve profound loss of control over
one's Behavior NPD is one of them the
combination of an emotionally charg
situation in the context of a close and
familiar relationship increases the
likelihood that the person with NPD will
start blurring boundaries and projecting
and that's why their behavior seems to
fluctuate based on the situation it's
actually a facet of the disorder itself
not an argument against them having a
mental
illness okay so that's all for today I
hope this has been helpful in clearing
up some of these misconceptions if this
information felt controversial to you or
if it flew in the face of everything
you've read or heard about narcissism
then consider the possibility that
you've been consuming
misinformation everything I've said here
can be backed up by numerous Bonafide
references authoritative sources on
mental illness like the American
Psychiatric association the American
Psychological Association and
peer-reviewed clinical and research
literature there's a lot of really bad
messaging out there about NPD no one is
saying it isn't a problematic form of
Mental Illness but it's a mental illness
nonetheless and it's also one that can
be treated so if you or a loved one have
this disorder don't give up hope until
next time take good
[Music]
care and